Under the vid/opening graphic:

This whole fake news situation is out of hand, and no one wants to be the next clown spreading nonsense about something that never happened! Learn to spot the lies in your news feed. 

Between poop graphic and thumbs up/thumbs down:

Outsmart the news fakers by knowing these telltale signs that something’s not right. 

Green/Yellow/Red descriptions:

RED:
Lacks an author
Cites only or mostly anonymous sources
Plays into bias with super dramatic language but thin evidence
Contains no hyperlinks that allow you to double check claims
Uses over-the-top punctuation, with spelling and grammatical errors

YELLOW: 
Portrays only one side of the story
Has a URL that doesn’t end in .org, .edu, or .gov 
Appears on a site that’s been dinged by fact-checking sites 
Seems too good or too bad to be true
Has a headline that seems declarative but ends in a question mark

GREEN: 
Links to lots of primary sources identified by name
Includes unedited video or photos of the events described
Written by an author with a track record of accurate reporting
Represents different sides of the story with specific quotes
Publishes funding sources and editorial standards

Test Your BS Detector
Delete apostrophe: “Think you know fake news? Take our super awesome quiz” 

QUESTION 1: (Trump FB)

This graphic went viral on social media but was debunked. What should make you doubt it? 
The font looks too formal
No link to the original post
The date
The cheesy photo

ANSWER: B

EXPLANATION: 

Anyone can photoshop words on top of an image! Memes like this can originate from satire sites, hacked accounts, or tabloids that make stuff up so you grab them while paying for toilet paper. Check your sources before you share!

QUESTION 2: (Clinton pneumonia)

This article questions whether Hillary Clinton really had pneumonia when she ran for president. What makes you think twice about this reporting? 
The source, Breitbart, is a far-right media organization with a track record of targeting Clinton.
In the picture, Clinton looks totally healthy.
Without evidence, the author hints that Clinton has a super-serious degenerative disease instead.
A and C

ANSWER D

EXPLANATION:
 
Let’s say my friend has a pimple, but I tell the whole school she has herpes, and she doesn’t get a date to prom. That’s like this article, except what’s at stake is who leads America. Don’t be fooled by alarming, speculative claims. 

QUESTION 3: Women + military

Freaked out that her daughter will have to register for the draft, your aunt shares this New York Times story the week Trump takes office. What’s wrong with that? 

There’s no way the US Senate would ever force females to register for the draft. 
It’s an old story. The provision Aunt Cheryl’s worried about was struck from the version that passed. 
Only trust coverage of the military written by active duty personnel. 
The photo comes from “Getty Images” and not the New York Times. 

ANSWER: B

EXPLANATION: 

This story was perfectly accurate--at the time it was published. But it went viral 10 months later, when people started sharing it like crazy long after the provision was killed. Timing is everything, so check your dates!

QUESTION 4: 


This article says cops send people to jail on the basis of a drug test known for false positives. Why trust this story?
Multiple named sources including national crime data and a rep from the company that produced the drug tests in question.
Reliable hyperlinks
Unbiased voice
All of the above

ANSWER: D

EXPLANATION: 

Bring a skeptical eye to everything you read, but when you see a story like this, you get to drop the cynicism and accept the facts. Maybe even share and act on what you learn. 

NEED: POST-QUIZ COPY INCLUDING SCORE AND BUTTON FOR LESSON PLAN (TC)

NEED: CREDITS (TC)

FOR POSSIBLE USE IN CLOSING COPY:

When in doubt, check Politifact, Snopes, News Literacy Project, or Youth Radio’s own guide to fact-checking like a pro.


